Bep36 (#1)
surchs/bids-specification: src/appendices/phenotype.md

### 7. Summary

This appendix described the guidelines for the best tabular phenotypic data. A short summary table here describes when to use which files.

| File                           | Single session data | Multiple session data |
| :----------------------------- | :------------------ | :-------------------- |
| Participants                   | RECOMMENDED         | RECOMMENDED           |
| Phenotypic and assessment data | RECOMMENDED         | RECOMMENDED           |
| Sessions                       | OPTIONAL            | REQUIRED              |
| Demographics                   | OPTIONAL            | RECOMMENDED           |

## Examples

What follows are a few common use case examples for tabular phenotypic files.

### 1 participant session with both non-tabular and tabular phenotypic data

File tree

```text
phenotype/
    tool.json
    tool.tsv
sub-01/anat/
    sub-01_T1w.json
    sub-01_T1w.nii.gz
```

Contents of `phenotype/tool.tsv`

```text
participant_id	measurement_1	measurement_2
sub-01	value1	value2
```

### 1 participant with 2 sessions, where 1 session is only tabular phenotype and the other is only imaging

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

With only two sessions like this you might want to make it look like one session, but it is more correct to have the sessions separated and have `session_id` `Levels` noted in the `sessions.json`, especially if the sessions were collected days, weeks, or months apart.

```

        "Description": "When the data acquisition started"
    },
    "age": {
        "Units": "years"
    }
}
```

Contents of `participants.tsv`. Note how this file only contains age at the earliest session. This is intended for the expectation of 1 row per participant in the participant file.

```text
participant_id	age	sex
sub-01	10	M
sub-02	9	F
sub-03	11	F
```

Contents of `phenotype/demographics.tsv`. Measures or features that can change from session to session belong here especially.

```text
participant_id	session_id	gender	race	household_income
sub-01	ses-baseline	3	4	5
sub-01	ses-followupMRI	3	4	5
sub-01	ses-interview	4	4	6
sub-02	ses-baseline	1	3	3
sub-02	ses-interview	1	7	3
sub-03	ses-baseline	2	10	4
sub-03	ses-followupMRI	5	10	4
```

For more complete examples, see the `pheno00*` bids-examples on GitHub.

[^1]: A session is any logical grouping of imaging and behavioral data consistent across participants. Session can (but doesn't have to) be synonymous to a visit in a longitudinal study. In situations where different data types are obtained over several visits (for example fMRI on one day followed by DWI the day after) those can still be grouped in one session.

> [^2]: Datetime format and the anonymization procedure are described in [Units](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/02-common-principles.html#units).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^2]: Datetime format and the anonymization procedure are described in [Units](../02-common-principles.md#units).
```

# Tabular phenotypic data guidelines

This appendix is a collection of guidelines and examples utilizing these guidelines for creating well-organized aggregated tabular phenotypic data.

## Guidelines

The following guidelines are all **RECOMMENDED** when preparing tabular phenotypic data like the participants file, sessions file, demographics file, or phenotypic and assessment data. The language below uses REQUIRED, MUST, and others to imply these are the requirements for these **RECOMMENDED** guidelines.

> ### 1. Aggregation

Author: ```suggestion
### 1. Aggregation of data across sessions
```

> Tabular phenotypic data files are prepared as one pair of data dictionary JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) file and data tab-separated value (TSV) file. Aggregation refers to the contents of the TSV file, collecting all participant data into one TSV per tabular phenotypic file.

Author: ```suggestion
Phenotypic data MUST be prepared as one pair of a tabular file in tab-separated value (TSV) format and a corresponding data dictionary in  JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format. Aggregation refers to the contents of the TSV file, collecting all participant data into one TSV per tabular phenotypic file.
```
This is essentially a change from MAY -> MUST in [https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common-principles.html#tabular-files](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common-principles.html%23tabular-files&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1741875485953254&usg=AOvVaw0oThgLuHy_0wqO4JT_Lqhq) right?

Author: I am thinking if the part about "MUST have sidecar/data dictionary" shouldn't get its own section above because it is an important difference b/w the guidelines and the base spec, and I don't think it has much to do with "Aggregation" otherwise

### 2. Phenotypic and assessment data

In phenotypic and assessment data each measurement tool has an independent aggregated data TSV file in which the user collects all subjects, sessions, and/or runs of data as one entry per row (with a row defined by the smallest unit of acquisition). In other words:

1. Each row MUST start with `participant_id`.
2. Each TSV file MUST contain a `session_id` column when multiple [sessions](../glossary.md#session-entities)[^1] are present in the data set regardless of whether those sessions are in the `phenotype/` data, `sub-<label>/` data, or a combination of the two.
3. If more than one of the same measurement tool is acquired within the same `session_id`, a run column MUST be added.
4. To encode the acquisition time for a measurement tool’s `session_id`, add the `session_id` to the sessions file and include the OPTIONAL `acq_time` column.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

| **Column name**  | **Required**                                                                              | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `participant_id` | always                                                                                    | MUST be the first column in the file.   Note that data for one participant may be represented  across multiple rows in case of multiple sessions or runs,  and therefore the entry in the `participant_id` column will be repeated.                                    |
| `session _id`    | if sessions are defined anywhere in the dataset                                           | A `session_id` column MUST be added  to all tabular files in the phenotype directory  as soon as multiple sessions are present in the data set  regardless of whether those sessions are in the  `phenotype/` data, `sub-<label>/` data,  or a combination of the two. |
| `run _id`        | the measurement or assessment described in  THIS tabular file was repeated in ANY session |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

```
I think a table might help clarify here

Furthermore, if you have to add a `session_id` column to the tabular phenotypic data, you then MUST also introduce a session directory to the imaging data, even if only one imaging session has been created. This rule can be considered as "**if anyone uses sessions, everyone uses sessions**." And vice versa, if imaging data has session directories, all imaging data and tabular phenotypic data MUST have sessions.

> This produces a file in which same-participant entries can take up as many rows as needed according to the smallest unit of acquisition.

Author: ```suggestion
This produces a file in which same-participant entries can take up as many rows as needed according to the smallest unit of acquisition.
The combination of values in the participant_id, session_id and run_id (if present) columns MUST be unique for the entire tabular file.
```

### 3. Sessions file

If there is more than one session for any one participant, then it is REQUIRED to provide a sessions file at the dataset root. The sessions file MUST list all sessions for all subjects across imaging and tabular phenotypic data.

> When a sessions file is in use, you MUST NOT provide participant-level sessions files which would otherwise use the inheritance principle. If a sessions file is provided, then it MUST begin with a `participant_id` column followed immediately by a `session_id` column. The data dictionary JSON’s `session_id` field MUST include `Levels` with the description of each possible `session_id`.

Author: ```suggestion
When a sessions file is in use, you MUST NOT provide additional sessions files at the  participant-level which would otherwise use the inheritance principle. If a sessions file is provided, then it MUST begin with a `participant_id` column followed immediately by a `session_id` column. The data dictionary JSON’s `session_id` field MUST include `Levels` with the description of each `session_id`.
```
I think "possible" implies "future" but I think you mean "current" or "present"

### 7. Summary

This appendix described the guidelines for the best tabular phenotypic data. A short summary table here describes when to use which files.

| File                           | Single session data | Multiple session data |
| :----------------------------- | :------------------ | :-------------------- |
| Participants                   | RECOMMENDED         | RECOMMENDED           |
| Phenotypic and assessment data | RECOMMENDED         | RECOMMENDED           |
| Sessions                       | OPTIONAL            | REQUIRED              |
| Demographics                   | OPTIONAL            | RECOMMENDED           |

## Examples

What follows are a few common use case examples for tabular phenotypic files.

### 1 participant session with both non-tabular and tabular phenotypic data

File tree

```text
phenotype/
    tool.json
    tool.tsv
sub-01/anat/
    sub-01_T1w.json
    sub-01_T1w.nii.gz
```

Contents of `phenotype/tool.tsv`

```text
participant_id	measurement_1	measurement_2
sub-01	value1	value2
```

### 1 participant with 2 sessions, where 1 session is only tabular phenotype and the other is only imaging

> With only two sessions like this you might want to make it look like one session, but it is more correct to have the sessions separated and have `session_id` `Levels` noted in the `sessions.json`, especially if the sessions were collected days, weeks, or months apart.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
With only one imaging and one phenotypic session each in this example you might want to make merge both imaging and phenotypic data under one session. But it is more correct to have separate sessions for the imaging and phenotypic data, especially if the sessions were collected days, weeks, or months apart. You can denote both sessions and their acquisition time and in the sessions.tsv file have `session_id` `Levels` noted in the `sessions.json` sidecar.
```

Author: I am an easily distracted reader, so if you spell things out for me, I can follow better.

# Tabular phenotypic data guidelines

This appendix is a collection of guidelines and examples utilizing these guidelines for creating well-organized aggregated tabular phenotypic data.

## Guidelines

The following guidelines are all **RECOMMENDED** when preparing tabular phenotypic data like the participants file, sessions file, demographics file, or phenotypic and assessment data. The language below uses REQUIRED, MUST, and others to imply these are the requirements for these **RECOMMENDED** guidelines.

### 1. Always pair tabular data with data dictionaries

Tabular phenotypic data MUST be prepared as one pair of a tabular file in tab-separated value (TSV) format and a corresponding data dictionary in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format.

### 2. Aggregate data across sessions

> Aggregation refers to the contents of the TSV file. It is REQUIRED to collect all participant data into one TSV per tabular phenotypic file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Aggregation refers to the contents of the TSV file. It is REQUIRED to collect all participant data, if they exist, from multiple sessions and/or runs, into one TSV per tabular phenotypic file. See example [here](#examples/2-participants-with-a-mix-of-tabular-phenotypic-data-and-imaging-sessions)
```

### 5. Sessions age

It is RECOMMENDED to use the `age` column to record participant age at every session. This reduces data duplication across tabular data files. The `Units` of `age` do not have to be years so long as the units of the age are written in `sessions.json`. Consider participant privacy or study objectives when selecting the `Units` of `age` or the accuracy of `age` data.

### 6. Sessions `acq_time`

Whenever possible, it is RECOMMENDED to also collect acquisition time for tabular phenotypic data and store the time of acquisition[^2] of each row inside a column named `acq_time` in the sessions file.

When needed to preserve participant privacy, you SHOULD record relative acquisition times with respect to the earliest session. Relative session acquisition times MAY be listed as durations from the earliest session (baseline) in days, months, or years using the `acq_time` column.

### 7. Demographics file

> Some studies collect demographics into their own tabular phenotypic data file already. In these cases, it is RECOMMENDED to house this data in the `phenotype/` directory as a TSV called `demographics.tsv` and its corresponding data dictionary JSON called `demographics.json`.

Reviewer 3: For furture, maybe we should expand on this to clarify the difference between `participants.tsv` and `demographics.tsv`?

# Tabular phenotypic data guidelines

This appendix is a collection of guidelines and examples utilizing these guidelines for creating well-organized aggregated tabular phenotypic data.

## Guidelines

These guidelines are all **RECOMMENDED** when preparing
tabular phenotypic data like the
participants file, sessions file, demographics file,
or phenotypic and assessment data.
The language below uses REQUIRED, MUST, and others to imply
these are the requirements for these **RECOMMENDED** guidelines.

### 1. Always pair tabular data with data dictionaries

Tabular phenotypic data MUST be prepared as one pair of a tabular file
in tab-separated value (TSV) format and a corresponding data dictionary
in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format.

### 2. Aggregate data across sessions

Aggregation refers to the contents of the TSV file. It is REQUIRED
to collect all participant data into one TSV per tabular phenotypic file.

> ### 3. Phenotypic and assessment data

Author: ```suggestion
### 3. Ensure minimal annotation for phenotypic and assessment data
```

| `run`            | CONDITIONAL ; If there are multiple runs within any session | A chronological `run` number is used when a measurement tool or assessment described by a tabular file was repeated within a session. |
| `acq_time`       | OPTIONAL        | If acquisition time is available, the `acq_time` column CAN be used to record the time of acquisition of each row in the tabular file. |

Furthermore, if you have to add a `session_id` column to the
tabular phenotypic data, you then MUST also introduce a session directory to the
imaging data, even if only one imaging session has been created.
This rule can be considered as "**if anyone uses sessions, everyone uses sessions**."
And vice versa, if imaging data has session directories,
all imaging data and tabular phenotypic data MUST have sessions.

This produces a file in which same-participant entries can take up as many rows
as needed according to the smallest unit of acquisition.
The combination of values in the `participant_id`, `session_id`, and `run` (if present)
columns MUST be unique for the entire tabular file.

> ### 4. Demographics file

Author: ```suggestion
### 4. Use demographics.tsv for common variables about participants
```

Some studies collect demographics into their own tabular phenotypic data file already.
In these cases, it is RECOMMENDED to house this data in the `phenotype/` directory
as a TSV called `demographics.tsv` and its corresponding data dictionary JSON
called `demographics.json`.

> ### 5. Sessions file

Author: ```suggestion
### 5. Use the sessions.tsv file at the root level
```

If there is more than one session for any one participant, then
it is REQUIRED to provide a sessions file at the dataset root.
The sessions file MUST list all sessions for all subjects across
imaging and tabular phenotypic data.

When a sessions file is in use, you MUST NOT provide additional sessions files
at the  participant-level which would otherwise use the inheritance principle.
If a sessions file is provided, then it MUST begin with a `participant_id` column
followed immediately by a `session_id` column. The data dictionary JSON file’s
`session_id` field MUST include `Levels` with the description of each `session_id`.

> ### 6. Sessions age

Author: ```suggestion
### 6. Store longitudinal age in `demographics.tsv`
```

Author: I think this section is a bit confusing. We said

- everything about a participant -> `/phenotypic`
- everything about a session -> `/sessions.tsv`

But here we say "put age in sessions.tsv". I propose we don't do that and keep things simple and consistent (e.g. acquisition  time by contrast could go to sessions.tsv)

Reviewer 2: I agree with everything about a participant -> /phenotypic.
I couldn't remember what was the exact final consensus so I revisited [PR #465 (Example datasets for bep036)](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/465/files). I don't know if @Arshitha did it on purpose but we can actually compare both scenarios. [pheno002](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/465/files#diff-fd52d10e3b403907550d363b76d6335b4e76a0d60cf28777db73d7f64b32084f) and [pheno003](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/465/files#diff-b698956d9d4c97e59513bf5b9553578923036bfb6888d4e08c9ea283a881599b) apply the changing age in sessions.tsv while pheno005 keeps everything in demographics.tsv (so multiple sessions/runs in this file). 

Browsing through pheno005 feels more intuitive to me than pheno002 and pheno003 and give an overview quicker.

It is RECOMMENDED to use the `age` column to record participant age at every session.
This reduces data duplication across tabular data files. The `Units` of `age`
do not have to be years so long as the units of the age are written in `sessions.json`.
Consider participant privacy or study objectives when selecting
the `Units` of `age` or the accuracy of `age` data.

> ### 7. Sessions `acq_time`

Author: ```suggestion
### 7. Record acquisition time of sessions with `acq_time`
```

            "ses-followupMRI": "6-months after baseline MRI follow-up",
            "ses-interview": "1-year after baseline in-person follow-up"
        }
    },
    "acq_time": {
        "Description": "When the data acquisition started"
    },
    "age": {
        "Description": "Age of the participant at the session",
        "Units": "years"
    }
}
```

Contents of `participants.tsv`. Note how this file only contains age at
the earliest session. This is intended for the expectation of 1 row per participant
in the participant file.

```Text
participant_id age sex
sub-01         10  M
sub-02         9   F
sub-03         11  F
```

Contents of `phenotype/demographics.tsv`. Measures or features that can change
from session to session belong here especially.

```Text
participant_id session_id      gender race household_income
sub-01         ses-baseline    3      4    5
sub-01         ses-followupMRI 3      4    5
sub-01         ses-interview   4      4    6
sub-02         ses-baseline    1      3    3
sub-02         ses-interview   1      7    3
sub-03         ses-baseline    2      10   4
sub-03         ses-followupMRI 5      10   4

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is this aligned with our latest discussion? 
1. Age at the earliest session in `participants.tsv` vs `demographics.tsv` ?
2. Age in sessions.tsv while we already have changing variables in `demographics.tsv` ?

| Demographics                   | OPTIONAL            | RECOMMENDED           |

## Examples

What follows are a few common use case examples for tabular phenotypic files.

### 1 participant session with both non-tabular and tabular phenotypic data

File tree

```Text
phenotype/
    <measurement_tool_name>.json
    <measurement_tool_name>.tsv
sub-01/anat/
    sub-01_T1w.json
    sub-01_T1w.nii.gz
```

Contents of `phenotype/<measurement_tool_name>.tsv`

```Text
participant_id measurement_1 measurement_2
sub-01 value1 value2
```

### 1 participant with 2 sessions, where 1 session is only tabular phenotype and the other is only imaging

With only one imaging and one phenotypic session each in this example you might want
to merge both imaging and phenotypic data under one session. But it is more correct to
have separate sessions for the imaging and phenotypic data, especially if
the sessions were collected days, weeks, or months apart. You can denote both sessions
and their acquisition time in the `sessions.tsv` file and have `session_id` `Levels` noted
in the `sessions.json` sidecar. Below are a CORRECT and an INCORRECT example

> of prepared data following these guidelines.

Reviewer 2: isn't ultimately the curator's decision to decide what gets included in each session? That said, as long as acq_time is provided for all sessions (whether pheno or MRI) it's easy to reorganize or align the data based on actual `acq_time`. Without that info, though, it’s hard to consider sessions like `ses-MRI` and `ses-pheno` as truly time-aligned. I guess it shifts (some of) the responsibility from the curator to the _data user_ to make that decision when acq_time is missing, which, as we've talked about, happens more than we'd like in practice.

Btw, this is more a thought than actual action point to address.
